doc(adr): data-test attributes (#343)
Talend/design-system: adr/data-test.md

# [data-test] attributes

## Context

Quality Assurance teams perform automated tests on Products for non-regression testing.

## Problems

QA teams lean on HTML ID attributes or XPath to automate tests on UI, and updates on the shared library can break these scenarios.

## Solutions

> Expose [data-test] attributes for QA purpose suggest in the components or layout markup.
> 1 — By documenting them, the first benefit will be to act on a contract with our QA team.
> 2 — By using them, after all, the second benefit will also be to perform component testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Systematically enforce [data-test] attributes for QA purpose in the components or layout markup that require them.
We see two benefits to that pattern:

1 — Better documentation. The single data attribute act as a contract with our QA team and it's easy to find which components are under that contract.

2 — Easier of use. Component testing becomes more straightforward as the same pattern can be expected on all design system components.
```
Does that make more sense to you as well?

```css
[data-test="<block_name>.<element_type>[?<element_index>].<?element_identifier>"]
```

| Identifier           | Optional | Description                                                                                                                                                      |
| -------------------- | -------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `block_name`         |          | Component or layout identifier from our design language (ex: modal, search, password, inlineediting, etc.)                                                       |
| `element_type`       |          | Element or its type used (ex: button, link, input, textarea, radio, etc.)                                                                                        |
| `element_index`      | yes      | Element index if it's repeated (radio, menu items, etc.)                                                                                                         |

> | `element_identifier` | yes      | A short and comprehensive identifier when we talk about it each other, in case of a form field we can reuse its label value (reveal, cancel, edit, submit, etc.) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `element_identifier` | yes      | A short and comprehensive identifier. In case of a form field, we can use its label value (reveal, cancel, edit, submit, etc.) for instance. |
```

> We need to precise something,
> 
> > To decide which values to use and to live in the Design System, we definitively have to be **context agnostic**.
> > It seems we can't determine if we will use the input for a `first name` or an `API key name`.
> > That's why we need to **keep it simple and stupid**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stick to this ruleset but keep in mind:

> This ruleset applies to Design System components: we definitively have to be **context agnostic**.
> If we're testing a text input, it could for instance be used for a `first name` or an `API key name`.
> That's why we need to **keep it simple and stupid** when naming things.

Describe the pattern, not the specific one-shot use you will use it for.
```

> # [data-test] attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Use [data-test] attributes for generic automated tests
```

| `block_name`         |          | Component or layout identifier from our design language (ex: modal, search, password, inlineediting, etc.)                                                       |
| `element_type`       |          | Element or its type used (ex: button, link, input, textarea, radio, etc.)                                                                                        |
| `element_index`      | yes      | Element index if it's repeated (radio, menu items, etc.)                                                                                                         |
| `element_identifier` | yes      | A short and comprehensive identifier when we talk about it each other, in case of a form field we can reuse its label value (reveal, cancel, edit, submit, etc.) |

We need to precise something,

> To decide which values to use and to live in the Design System, we definitively have to be **context agnostic**.
> It seems we can't determine if we will use the input for a `first name` or an `API key name`.
> That's why we need to **keep it simple and stupid**.

> Keep in mind that the Product teams can add `[data-testid]` to give a more comprehensive identifier.
> The ones we embed are here in addition to what the product team can provide.
> `[data-test]` are just the default ones that we can agree on, to be able to write E2E tests without worrying about the HTML markup or the CSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more specific testing, Product teams can add `[data-testid]` in their implementation of the shared components and use a more comprehensive identifier there.

The `[data-test]` attributes here are an addition to what the product team can provide.

`[data-test]` attributes are the default that we can agree on, enabling to write E2E tests without worrying about the HTML markup or the CSS.
```

# Use [data-test] attributes for generic automated tests

## Context

Quality Assurance teams perform automated tests on Products for non-regression testing.

## Problems

QA teams lean on HTML ID attributes or XPath to automate tests on UI, and updates on the shared library can break these scenarios.

## Solutions

> Systematically enforce [data-test] attributes for QA purpose in the components or layout markup that require them.

Author: ```suggestion
Systematically enforce [data-test] attributes for QA purpose in the components or layout markup that require them. 
They will be **mandatory for each interactive element**, at least.
```

Stick to this ruleset but keep in mind:

> This ruleset applies to Design System components: we definitively have to be **context agnostic**.
> If we're testing a text input, it could for instance be used for a `first name` or an `API key name`.
> That's why we need to **keep it simple and stupid** when naming things.

Describe the pattern, not the specific one-shot use you will use it for.

For more specific testing, Product teams can add `[data-testid]` in their implementation of the shared components and use a more comprehensive identifier there.

The `[data-test]` attributes here are an addition to what the product team can provide.

`[data-test]` attributes are the default that we can agree on, enabling to write E2E tests without worrying about the HTML markup or the CSS.

### Examples

- For a "Close" button of a `Modal`
  `[data-test="modal.button.close"]`

- For a "Reveal" button of a `Password` form field
  `[data-test="password.button.reveal"]`

- For a textarea of the `Inline Editing` in edition mode
  `[data-test="inlineediting.textarea"]`

- For a filter of a list
  `[data-test="search.input"]`

> - For a `Switch` with three options, which it used radio buttons under the hood

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For a `Switch` with three options, which it uses radio buttons under the hood
```

# Use [data-test] attributes for generic automated tests

## Context

Quality Assurance teams perform automated tests on Products for non-regression testing.

## Problems

QA teams lean on HTML ID attributes or XPath to automate tests on UI, and updates on the shared library can break these scenarios.

## Solutions

Systematically enforce [data-test] attributes for QA purpose in the components or layout markup that require them. 

> They will be **mandatory for each interactive element**, at least.

Author: ```suggestion
They will be mandatory for each interactive element, at least.
```

We see two benefits to that pattern:

> 1 — Better documentation. The single data attribute act as a contract with our QA team and it's easy to find which components are under that contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1 — Better documentation. The single data attribute acts as a contract with our QA team and it's easy to find which components are under that contract.
```

> 2 — Easier of use. Component testing becomes more straightforward as the same pattern can be expected on all design system components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2 — Ease of use. Component testing becomes more straightforward as the same pattern can be expected on all design system components.
```

Stick to this ruleset but keep in mind:

> This ruleset applies to Design System components: we definitively have to be **context agnostic**.
> If we're testing a text input, it could for instance be used for a `first name` or an `API key name`.
> That's why we need to **keep it simple and stupid** when naming things.

Describe the pattern, not the specific one-shot use you will use it for.

For more specific testing, Product teams can add `[data-testid]` in their implementation of the shared components and use a more comprehensive identifier there.

The `[data-test]` attributes here are an addition to what the product team can provide.

`[data-test]` attributes are the default that we can agree on, enabling to write E2E tests without worrying about the HTML markup or the CSS.

### Examples

- For a "Close" button of a `Modal`
  `[data-test="modal.button.close"]`

- For a "Reveal" button of a `Password` form field
  `[data-test="password.button.reveal"]`

- For a textarea of the `Inline Editing` in edition mode
  `[data-test="inlineediting.textarea"]`

- For a filter of a list
  `[data-test="search.input"]`

> - For a `Switch` with three options, which it uses radio buttons under the hood

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For a `Switch` with three options, which uses radio buttons under the hood
```
My bad, I think
